---
title: Write a benchmark (part 2)
author: Dr. Matthias Kretz
date: 0000-02-04
layout: post
---

(still no SIMD yet)

Back in the `benchmarks` directory:

> Use compiler optimization barriers
>
> Compiler optimization barriers are hard to get right. For the rest of the 
exercises today, please use `vir::fake_read(...)` and `vir::fake_modify(...)`: 
[:green_book: vir-simd | benchmark support functions][1]. (I'll explain the 
purpose of "vir-simd" later.)
{:.block-task}

> Switch to benchmark.h
>
> In preparation of further simplifications, let's also switch to the 
`"benchmark.h"` header, which defines a few helper functions and already 
implements `main()`.
{:.block-task}

Your `peakflop.cpp` should look like this now:
```c++
#include "benchmark.h"
#include <vir/simd_benchmarking.h>

void peak(benchmark::State &state)
{
  float x = 1;
  vir::fake_modify(x);
  for (auto _ : state) {
    x = x * 3 + 1;
    vir::fake_read(x);
  }

  // compute FLOP/s and FLOP/cycle
  add_flop_counters(state, 2);
}

// Register the function as a benchmark
BENCHMARK(peak);
```

> Where's the performance?
>
> On an Intel CPU you will likely see 0.5 FLOP/cycle now. That's quite far away 
from the 4 FLOP/cycle my slides showed for scalars. Where's the factor of 8 
hiding?
{:.block-warning}

> TIP
>
> `addss` and `mulss` require more than 1 clock cycle to produce a result; 
rather on the order of 3–5 cycles.
>
> [:green_book: Intel Optimization Reference Manual][2] (pages 52–54)
>
> [:green_book: uops.info on `mulss`][3] (Lat: Latency — the time it takes from 
start of instruction execution until the result is ready. TP: Throughput — the 
time it takes before another instruction can be executed. time = clock cycles. 
TP 0.5 means the CPU can execute two of these instructions per clock cycle.)
{:.block-tip}

> Issue independent instructions
>
> Edit `peak` to issue more *independent* `addss` and `mulss` instructions per 
loop iteration.
{:.block-task}

> Remaining factor of 2?
>
> You should be able to reach 2 FLOP/cycle now. What is the remaining factor of 
2?
{:.block-warning}

> TIP
>
> [:green_book: uops.info on `vfmadd132ss`][4]
{:.block-tip}

> Why no FMA?
>
> Our example computes a *multiplication* with subsequent *addition*. So why 
doesn't the compiler emit a fused multiply-add (FMA) instruction?
{:.block-task}

> TIP
>
> [:green_book: GCC x86 Options][5]
>
> [:green_book: GCC Optimize Options: `-ffp-contract`][6]
>
> Note the defaults. `-ffp-contract` defaults to producing FMAs already. 
However, the compiler assumes your code should be able to run on the original 
x86_64 AMD Athlon CPU. That CPU didn't have FMA instructions.
{:.block-tip}

> Compile with -march=native
>
> Compile with `-march=native`. Modify `CMakeLists.txt` and change 
`target_compile_options` from `"-std=gnu++2b"` to 
`"-std=gnu++2b;-march=native"`.
>
> ```sh
> make run_peakflop
> ```
{:.block-task}

## Outlook

We will come back to this benchmark after we covered vectorization and 
`simd<T>`.


[1]: https://github.com/mattkretz/vir-simd#benchmark-support-functions
[2]: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/671488/intel-64-and-ia-32-architectures-optimization-reference-manual.html
[3]: https://uops.info/table.html?search=mulss%20xmm)&cb_lat=on&cb_tp=on&cb_uops=on&cb_ports=on&cb_SKX=on&cb_ADLP=on&cb_ZEN2=on&cb_ZEN4=on&cb_measurements=on&cb_doc=on&cb_avx=on&cb_avx2=on&cb_sse=on
[4]: https://uops.info/table.html?search=fmadd132ss%20xmm)&cb_lat=on&cb_tp=on&cb_uops=on&cb_ports=on&cb_SKX=on&cb_ADLP=on&cb_ZEN2=on&cb_ZEN4=on&cb_measurements=on&cb_doc=on&cb_avx=on&cb_avx2=on&cb_fma=on&cb_sse=on
[5]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/x86-Options.html
[6]: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Optimize-Options.html#index-ffp-contract
